---
geometry: left=2cm, right=2cm, top=2cm, bottom=2cm
title: Math310 Summary
author: Ethan Graham
date: \today
---

# Week 01

In this class, the induction principle, well-ordering principle, and
strong induction principles were covered. On top of this, a couple of 
theorems were proved using these principles, and Euler's Totient function 
was introduced.

## Induction Principle
Let $S \subset \mathbb N$ such that 

1. $0 \in S$
2. If $n \in S \Rightarrow n + 1 \in S$

Then $S = \mathbb N$

## Well Ordering Principle
Every nonempty subset of $\mathbb N$ has a least element.

## Strong Induction Principle
Let $S \subset \mathbb N$ such that

1. $0 \in S$
2. if $\lbrace 0, 1 \dots n \rbrace \in S \Rightarrow n + 1 \in S$

Then $S = \mathbb N$

## *Proof* Induction $\Rightarrow$ Strong Induction
Assume that we have $S \subset \mathbb N$ s.t.

1. $0 \in S$
2. $\lbrace 0, \dots, n \rbrace \in S \Rightarrow n + 1 \in S$

And we need to show that $S = \mathbb N$ using only the induction principle.

Let $P(n)$ be the proposition $\rbrace 0, \dots, n\rbrace \subseteq S$.
$P(0)$ true because $0\in S$. Assume now that $P(k)$ true. This implies that
$\lbrace 0, \dots, k\rbrace \subset S \Rightarrow k+1 \in S$ This implies
that $\lbrace 0, \dots, k, k+1\rbrace \subset S$

We have thus proved that $P(k) \Rightarrow P(k+1) \Rightarrow$
by induction principle, $P(n)$ true $\forall n \in \mathbb N$
$\Rightarrow \lbrace 0, \dots, n \rbrace \in S \forall n \in \mathbb B$
$\Rightarrow S = \mathbb N$

### Summary of Proof
Basically we assume that properties 1 and 2 of strong induction principle
hold, and show that $P(k) \rightarrow P(k+1)$ which implies that
$S = \mathbb N$ by the regular induction principle.

## *Proof* $WOP \Rightarrow$ Induction
We prove this using the *"minimal criminal"* or *"minimal counterexample"*
method.

Suppose $S \subset \mathbb N$ suh that $0 \in S$ and
$n \in S \Rightarrow n + 1 \in S$. *(Properties of induction)*. We show
that $S = \mathbb N$ using the well-ordering principle.

Let $S' = \mathbb N \setminus S$ and suppose that $S' \neq \emptyset$.
Then by the well ording principle, $\exists k \in S'$ a least element.
$0 \notin S'$ because $0 \in S \Rightarrow k = m + 1$ for some
$m \in \mathbb N$ and $m \notin S' \Rightarrow m \in S$.

But $m \in S \Rightarrow m + 1 \in S \Rightarrow k = m + 1 \in S$ and
$k = m + 1 \in S'$. But $S \cap S' = \emptyset \Rightarrow$ contradiction.
Therefore $S' = \emptyset \Rightarrow S = \mathbb n$

### Summary of Proof
We basically assume properties 1 and 2 of induction principle, then 
assume that the complement set $S'$ is non-empty, and assume it has a least
element $k \notin S$. However this leads to a contradiction, thus
$S = \mathbb N$

## *Theorem* Every natural number $n > 1$ has a prime divisor
We suppose that $S \neq \emptyset$ is the set of numbers that $>1$ that have
no prime divisor. This set must have a least element $k$ by the well
ording principle. $k$ cannot be prime because $k|k$
implying that $k$ is its own prime divisor. Thus $k$ must be composite.

This now implies that $k = a \cdot b$ for some $1 < a, b < k$. Since
$k$ is the least element of $S \Rightarrow a, b \notin S$. Therefore they
both have prime divisors $\Rightarrow a = p\cdot t$ for prime $p$. Thus
$k = p \cdot t \cdot b \Rightarrow k$ has a prime divisor. 
**Contradiction.** $\Rightarrow S = \emptyset$

## Euclidean Division
Let $n \in \mathbb Z$ and $d \in \mathbb Z ^+$. There exist two integers
$q, r \in \mathbb Z$ such that $n = qd +r$ and $r \in [0, d[$

## Euler's Totient Function
For any $n \in \mathbb Z^+$, $\varphi(n) =$ number of positive integers
smaller than $n$ such that $gcd(n, k) = 1$

# Week 02

## RSA

1. Choose two large distinct primes $p, q$
2. Let $m = pq \Rightarrow \varphi(m) = (p-1)(q-1)$
3. Choose $e \leq m - 1$ such that $gcd(e, \varphi(m)) = 1$
4. Use Euclidean method to find $d \leq m-1$ such that
$ed - k\varphi(m) = 1$ for a $k \in \mathbb Z$
5. Public encoding key $(m, e)$, keep decoding key $(m, d)$

This works because:

$$
x^{ed} (mod m) \equiv x (mod m) 
\forall x \in \lbrace 0, 1, \dots, m-1 \rbrace
$$

this holds thanks to *Fermat's little theorem*

## Groups
A group is a set $G$ sich a binary operation 
$\cdot: G \times G \rightarrow G$ satisfying

 satisfying

1. Associativity
2. $\exists$ a neural element $\mathbb 1 \in G$
3. For any $a \in G, \exists a^{-1} \in G$

$G$ is called **finite** if $|G| < \infty$, then $|G|$ is the order of the 
group.

$G$ is called **abelian** if $a \cdot b = b \cdot a$ for all $a, b \in G$

## Subgroups

$H \subset G$ is a **subgroup** if $H$ is a subet in $G$ such that
$\mathbb 1 \in H$ and $H$ is closed w.r.t $\cdot$ and taking inverses.

### Remark
Any group $G$ has a subgroup generated by one element $g \in G$. 
consider $\lbrace 1, g, g^2, \dots, g^{-1}, g^{-2}\lbrace$ =
$\langle g \rangle$. Then $\langle g \rangle$ is a subgroup by 
construction.

## Order
If there exists $n \in \mathbb N^+$ minimal s.t. $g^n = \mathbb 1_G$, then
$n$ is called the order of $g$. In a finite group, each element has finite
order.

## Cosets
Let $H \subset G$ a subgroup, with $g \in G$. The **left coset** $gH$ is
the set o group elements of the form $gH = \lbrace gh, h \in H$

We have the following properties

1. Two left cosets $xH$ and $yH$ are either $xH = yH$ or 
$xH \cap yH = \emptyset$
2. $\forall g \in G$ belongs to a left $H$-coset.
3. $|xH| = |H|$ for any $x \in G$

### Proof sketches
1. We can show that $xH \subset yH$ and $yH \subset xH$ if their intersection
is nonempty. Therefore they are either empty or equal.
2. Since $gH = \lbrace g 1, gh_1, \dots \rbrace$ and $g\cdot1 = g$ we see
that every $g$ belongs to a left $H$-coset.
3. $f: H \rightarrow xH$ is a bijection, and thus $|xH| = |H|$

## *Theorem* Lagrange
If $G$ is a finite group, and $H \subset G$ is a subgroup, then
$|H|$ divides $|G|$

***Proof on page 9 lecture 2***

## *definition* Index
The number of $H$-cosets in $G$ is called the index of $H$ in $G$. It is 
written $[G: H] = \frac{|G|}{|H|}$

### Corollary
1. Let $g \in G$ be a finite group. Then the order of $g$ divides $|G|$
2. $g^{|G|} = \mathbb 1$

***Proofs on page 10 lecture 2***

## Euler's Theorem
Let $a, n \in \mathbb Z ^+$ such that $gcd(a, n) = 1$. Then

$$
a^{\varphi(n)} \equiv 1 (mod\,n)
$$

## Fermat's Little Theorem
Let $a \in \mathbb Z ^+$, $p$ a prime such that $p$ does not divide $a$.
Then

$$
a^{p-1} \equiv 1 (mod\,p)
$$

# Week 03

## Group Homomorphisms
A map $\varphi: G \rightarrow H$ between two groups is a group homomorphism
if $\varphi (x \cdot_G y) = \varphi(x) \cdot_H \varphi(y)$.

This implies that $\varphi(\mathbb 1_G) = \mathbb 1_H$ and that
$\varphi(x^{-1}) = (\varphi(x))^{-1}$. A group homomorphism that is invertible
is called a group ***isomorphism***. We say that two groups are isomorphic.

Let $\varphi: G \rightarrow H$ be a group homomorphism. The 
$\varphi(G) \subset H$ is called the ***image*** of $\varphi$.

The set $\lbrace \varphi(g) \rbrace_{g \in G}$ is a subgroup in $H$.

## Generators of a group
Generators of a group $G$ is a minimal set of elements of $G$ such that any
element of $G$ can be written as a product of generators and their inverses.

## Relations
Any equation satisfied by group elements is called a relation.

## Presentation
A presentation of $G$ in generators and relations is an expression
$\langle S | R \rangle$ where $S$ is a set of generators and $R$ is a minimal
set of relations for the generators in $S$ such that any other relation in
$G$ follows from these.

# Week 04

## Kernel of a Homomorphism
The kernel of a homomorphmism $\varphi: G \rightarrow H$ is the set of elements
$g\in G$ such that $\varphi(g) = \mathbb I_H$

### *proposition*
Let $\varphi: G \rightarrow H$ be a group homomorphism. Then 
$ker\, \varphi \subset G$ is a subgroup. is a subgroup.

We prove this by showing that properties of subgroup hold for arbitrary elements
from the kernel.

## Normal Subgroup
$H \subset G$ is a normal subgroup if $\forall h \in H, \forall g \in G$ we
have $g h g^{-1} \in H$. We write $H \triangleleft G$.

If $\varphi$ is a group homomorphism from $G$ to $H$, then
$ker\,\varphi \triangleleft G$ is a normal subgroup.

## Elliptic Curves and Lenstra's Factorization Algorithm
An elliptic curve is a curve with the structure

$$
y^2 = x^3 + ax + b \textit{ over } \mathbb R \textit{ or } \mathbb Q
$$

The set of rational points on this curve has a group structure, with group
law is $P + Q = -R$.

1. The trivial element is a point $theta$ up at $\infty$
2. $P + 0 = 0 + P = P$ for any point $P$
3. $-P$ is the point symmetric w.r.t to the horizontal axis
$P + (-P) + 0 = 0$
4. If $P, Q$ are reflected w.r.t the horizontal axis, then $P + Q = 0$. If
$P = Q$, then take the intersection of the tangeant line to the curve at $Q$,
and find the intersection with the curve $\Rightarrow -2Q$. Otherwise, if
$P \neq Q$, then take the line passing through $P$ and $Q$ and find the 
third intersection $R$ with the curve $\Rightarrow P + Q = -R$

### Integer Factorization with Elliptic Curves

1. Pick an elliptic curve $y^2 = x^3 + ax + b$ over $\mathbb Z / n \mathbb Z$
and a point $P(x_0, y_0)$.
2. Compute $2P, 3!P, \dots, k!P$ for some integer $k > 0$. We note that
$3!P = 3 \cdot 2P = 3(2P) = 2\cdot 2P + 2P$. This involves computing slopes
modulo $n \Rightarrow \frac u v mod \, n$. This oly makes sense if $v$ is 
invertible $mod \, n \Leftrightarrow gcd(u,v) = 1 \Rightarrow$ if the
construction fails, then $gcd(u, v) > 1$ and you have found a nontrivial
factor of $n$. This method gives factorization of $n$ sub-exponential time
on $log \; n$


## Dihedral Groups
Group of rigid symmetries of a flat $n$-gon. Notation $D_n$
Check slides for drawings.

### Example
$sr = r^{-1}s$ is a relation in $D_4$

In general, the number of elements in $D_n$ is $2n$

### Proposition
$D_n$ admits a presentation in generators and relations.

$$
D_n = \langle r, s | r^n = 1, \, s^2 = 1, \, srs = r^{-1} \rangle
$$

## Quotient Groups: cosets with respect to a normal subgroup
If $H \triangleleft G$ is normal, then the set of left $H$-coses in $G$
naturally forms a group. Namely, define $(xH)(yH) = (xyH)$

- $(\mathbb 1H)$ is the neutral element
- $(x^{-1}H)$ is the inverse

# Week 05

## A Few Recalls

1. A subgroup $H \triangleleft G$ is normal if $ghg^{-1} \in H$ 
$\forall g \in G, \forall h \in H$
2. A quotient group $G/H$ is a group of left costets wrt to a normal subgroup
$H \triangleleft G$. Multiplication $(xH)(yH) = xyH$
3. If $\varphi: G_1 \rightarrow G_2$ is a group homomorphism, then
$ker\, \varphi \triangleleft G_1$ is normal in $G_1$
4. Any subgroup $H\subset G$ is normal in an abelian group $G$
$\forall h \in H, \forall g \in G \Rightarrow ghg^{-1} = hgg^{-1} = h \in H$
5. The dihedral group is non-abelian.

## Symmetric Group
$S_n$ is the group of permutations of $n$ elements $\lbrace 1 \dots n \rangle$
A permutation is an element of $S_n$; product by composition. Neutral element
is the trivial permutation.

## Cycle Notation for elements of $S_n$
**Insight:** Interpret permutations as functions. Thus the group operation
on $S_n$ becomes the function compotision $\circ$. Thus two permutations
$f$ and $g$ compose to $f \circ g$. This is just a more compact notation.

### Writing Cycle Notation
Assume

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2& 3& 4& 5\\ 
3 & 5& 4& 1& 2 
\end{pmatrix}
$$
a permutation. To write this in cycle notation, we go through all elements,
starting from $1$, and look where it maps. We don't need to go over $1$ again.
We see where this next element maps, and iterate. We do this until we reach $1$
again. In this example:

$$
1 \rightarrow 3 \rightarrow 4 \rightarrow 1 = (1 \; 3\; 4)
$$

We then continue with the next cycle, starting at the next element after $1$
that hasn't yet been covered. In this case, $2$.

$$
2 \rightarrow 5 \rightarrow 2 = (2 \; 5)
$$

Therefore, we can write the original permutation as

$$
(1 \; 3\; 4) (2 \; 5)
$$

Every element of the permutation appears exactly once in this cycle product.

A cycle of length $2$ is called a transposition. For example the case of 
$( 2 \; 5)$. 

### Composition of Cycles
Assume that we have

$$
a = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\
3 & 1 & 2 \end{pmatrix} \;\;\;
b = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\
3 & 2 & 1 \end{pmatrix}
$$

Then $a \cdot b = a \circ b$. So we "do $b$ first, then $a$". In cycle notation,
we have $a = (1 \; 3\; 2)$ and $b = (1\;3)$

- $1 \rightarrow 3$ in $b$, and $3 \rightarrow 2$ in $a$. Therefore
$1 \rightarrow 2$ in $a \cdot b$
- $2 \rightarrow 2$ in $b$, and $2 \rightarrow 1$ in a. Therefore
$2 \rightarrow 1$ in $a \cdot b$ and we have our first cycle $(1 \; 2)$
- $3 \rightarrow 1$ in $b$, and $1 \rightarrow 3$ in $a$. Therefore
$3 \rightarrow 3$ in $a \cdot b$ and we have our second cycle $(3)$. We have
finished.

Thus $a \cdot b = (1 \; 2)(3) = (1\;2)$

## Orbit
Let $\rho \in S_n$ and consider the subgroup 
$\langle \rho \rangle = \lbrace 1, \rho, \rho^2, \dots, \rho^{k-1}\rbrace$. For
$x \in \lbrace 1, \dots, n \rbrace$ we have

$$
\lbrace x, \rho x, \dots \rho^{k-1}x \rbrace = Orb_{\rho}(x)
$$

Put simply, $Orb_{\rho}(x)$ is all the places that $x$ can map to when we
permute $\lbrace 1, \dots n \rbrace$ once or several times with permutation
$\rho$.

If 

$$
\rho^i x_1 = \rho^j x_2 \text{ then } \rho^{i-j} x_1 = x_2 \Rightarrow
x_2 \in Orb_{\rho}(x_1) \Rightarrow \rho^k x_2 \in Orb_{\rho}(x_1) \Rightarrow
Orb_{\rho}(x_1) \subset Orb_{\rho}(x_2)
$$


And similarly

$$
Orb_{\rho}(x_1) \subset Orb_{\rho}(x_2) \Rightarrow 
Orb_{\rho}(x_1) = Orb_{\rho}(x_2)
$$

## Definition
$\pi \in S_n$ is a cycle if $\pi$ has just one nontrivial orbit with $>1$ 
element. The length of its nontrivial orbit is the length of the cycle.

## *proposition* Disjoint Cycles
Two cycles $\rho$ and $\pi$ are in $S_n$ are disjoint if their nontrivial
orbits do not intersect.

**Disjoint cycles commute**.

## *proposition* Every $k$-cycle is a product of $(k-1)$ transpositions
We prove this with induction on $k$

# Week 06
Recally that any $\sigma \in S_n$ can be written as a product of disjoint
cycles.

## Sign of a Permutation
**Theorem:** A product of an odd number of transpositions cannot be equal
to a product of an even number of transpositions.

**Definition:**
$$
sign(\sigma) = (-1)^{\text{number of transpositions in } \sigma}
$$

- $sign(\sigma) = 1 \Leftrightarrow \sigma$ even number of transpositions
- $sign(\sigma) = -1 \Leftrightarrow \sigma$ odd number of transpositions

We get that $sign(\sigma \cdot \tau) = sign(\sigma) \cdot sign(\tau)$ and that

$$
ker(sign) \triangleleft S_n \; \; ; ker(sign) = 
\lbrace \sigma \in S_n: \; \sigma = \text{ product of even num of transpositions}
\rbrace
$$

This is because the $ker$ of a homomorphism is a normal subgroup.

## Conjugacy Class
The Conjugacy Class of $h = \lbrace ghg^{-1 \rbrace_{g\in S_n}}$ is a 

